Welcome to Your Any of Your Lectures on Hallucination. My name is Douane and I'm a student at the A I P R L T Lab and here's my email to dress. If you have questions on hallucination afterward or if you want to master this, for example, you can always reach out. So today we're going to talk about hallucination, so it's technically when the system generates garbage content. In the case of machine translation is in some sense easier because hallucination is irrelevant to the source.

And since language models these days, the hype topics talk a bit more on hallucination in. Many of the slides have here on hallucination in our lens. It's based on a survey paper. So the first is on taxonomy of hallucination, so in that survey an expert recently released in November, so they divided it into two types of hallucination: This is where there is discrepancy between the generated contents and the verifiable real world. E then divide it further into sub-category. The first one is structural inconsistency.

And this happened when the last language model put something that is contradict to verifiable work. Another type is factual publication, and this happens when lasting model puts some contents. We don't know if it's correct or not, but we just simply know. The second type is frightfulness hallucination.

And this is more on the user viewpoint, and this type of presentation is when the generated content. The first thing is when the genera doesn't follow user instruction, and here they call it inconsistency. The second type is when the generated conflict with the context provided by the input, and here they call it context inconsistency, and the last type is self-consistency within the generated content by the last language model, then they call it logical inconsistency. This is an example of hallucination, so on the left the user is the first person to walk on the Moon. And the answer given by a Lost English model is the first person to walk on the Moon was Charles Invers in during the Primary Mission.

However, the correct answer that we know and we can verify given our facts is that Neil Armstrong was actually the first person to walk on the Moon during the Apollo. So this would be the factuality hallucination because it's conflict with what we know in the real world. On the right is an example of faithfulness hallucination where the user comes to follow the news article and then they provide the article. And then in the answer the model summarizes as in October twenty two thousand six. Which is wrong according to the given content, so here the output conflict with the source itself, the context provided by.

So that would be perfect for this hallucination. So the next thing is on the causes of hallucination. So maybe you already know for a large language model to train them. There are several processes: And the second step is to find, turn it on some supervised data, and the third step is to. So there are many things that can go wrong with stock process, which can amplify the incidence of hallucination.

So the first cause of hallucination is hallucination from data. The first thing is there can be misinformation and biases. And the first movement is imitated puzzles. So as you know, we need a large amount of text data to train large language models. Usually people script them from the Internet.

So there can be a lot of pulse information on the Internet and it would potentially hurt the large language model and make it create wrong data or. Another type of misinformation in biases is duplication biases. Because we script data from the Internet, it can also have multiple sources that say the same thing. And then when there are multiple multiplication data for pre-tanding last language model, it can happen because the last language model. And then when outputting something for the user, and when they don't know exactly what to say, it's likely.

Another type of social biases was mentioned already, but in our real world there's a lot of biases like gender, bias or ethics. Another cause for hallucination from data is knowledge boundary. The first thing is domain knowledge. Yet whether model doesn't have knowledge on some particular domain,. The data spread from the Internet is most likely to be general, and some specific domain data maybe is not that easy to script, so basically the model just doesn't know about those information, and then it's likely they will hallucinate when it's asked on some domains or information.

Another one is outdated factory knowledge because we scrape data from the Internet from all different times there. A lot of language model then you can lose it and create false information. Another problem is knowledge shortcut. This one is where the model doesn't fully understand the semantic of question, but they just rely on some spurious correlation. For example, when the model is asked: What is the capital of Canada? For example: Then, because in the training data you see Canada and Toronto happen to be close to each other,.

Then I'll put a capital tendency, Toronto, so it's not as strong as it can just rely on some correlation. The surface level stands close to each other, and then I'll put the wrong information. And then the last one is acknowledged, recall bill one. So this is where the model technically do have all the knowledge it takes, but then it still. A nossa empresa tem esse "long tail knowledge".

When you input the last language model with very long context, some people observe that sometimes the. But most of the time we just pay attention to the information that is in the beginning or at the end. And then potentially generate misinformation or wrong answers. Another one is complex scenario. This is also simple as when you ask human questions. It's typical for the model to produce.

Another cause of hallucination is hallucination from training and this can come from architecture. One thing they play in the survey is that the unidirectional representation of a language model can be inadequate. So, as you'd probably know, loss language model is strained in a nice worst prediction manner, so it's strained to generate tokens from left to right, and they claim that this might not be optimal because then the model doesn't have the full global context to generate. And also when the model generates things from left to right, it can happen that technically.

You can say something wrong, but because it was strange to generate things from left to right, it was forced to continue. Like when we try using Lost Language Model and then we answer something and then we ask it again: Are you sure? As in the model, do have the capability to realize that the answer is not that reliable because it is trained to output next. There could be none of more to hallucination because the model is forced to say something. That's the first and the next is attention bleaches. When we provide long context it can happen.

Another hallucination from training issues is exposure bias. Is also related to how the model is changed because during training we do teacher crossing and we assume that the model is. However, during inference it's not the case because we don't have the goal standard. So usually the input to the model is the prefix created by the model itself rather than some goal standard thing, and then there's some mismatch between training and infants. The last point is hallucination from alignment. The first point is capability misalignment.

So it can happen that during pre-training, the model learns some information, some knowledge, but then during the second phase, the supervised fine tuning, the model can be fine tuned to answer some question that is outside of what is already known. So technically during the fine training it can happen that the model is strained to generate. It could be a bad behavior because again the mob is taught to produce answers that it doesn't really sure. Another thing is believe misalignment, so that is the misalignment between the model's own knowledge.

So because we have the stealth reinforcement learning from human feedback,. It can happen that the model was just to produce answers that satisfy human preference rather than. And that could also lead to hallucination because, for example, if a user provides some information in the source then those are actually wrong according to model knowledge. And the last one is producing basic causes from the inference process. The first one is from the randomness in the sampling process, so as you know when recording,.

So because of this randomness, we have to balance between what the model's confidence about and how diverse the answer is. And if we have higher diversion, we have higher randomness. In that answer, it would also lead to a higher chance. Another point is imperfectly calling representation, and the first thing is insufficient complex attention. So the last language model is the other only.

So when it generates the next work, it pays attention to the soft sentence and also the prefix. And some research find that transformer base models sometimes have a tendency to pay more attention to. As in the focus span, it's more localized rather than pay more attention to some other long tile stuff. Another thing is softmax bottom net, so for softmax layer of rope you also have knowledge about this. So in the final decoder representation output we do one linear projection to the complementary space.

Some papers claim that because we have only one single vector representation, it's impossible for the model to create all the different. For example, in the last you have a factory presentation that is somehow close to the topic of running.

For example, when.

Ideally we want the projection to be close to the work random but also close to other words related to it like the work chance. So if we just use one single beta representation and we project it to the vocabulary size, then the vector cannot cover or cannot be close to all the possible work in the same. So that's what people call softmax bottleneck and they also propose different types of softmax like multiple layers for example. OK, so that's all along the process of information. So next we will talk about hallucination and detection. The first thing is to achieve external fat, and then we compare the output by a large language model with the fat.

Another way is to couple the overlap between generated content and source content, and if there is too much divergence between the generated content and the source content, then there is some faithfulness and can be detected. Another way is to do uncertainty estimation. So in this way it's somehow easier than receiving external facts because if you don't have to go look for facts on external source. The first way is to use lost language in general. In this way we would need to have the White Cubs access to the National English Model to get.

And if the token probability is too low or if the entropy is too high, it's probably that the last language model itself is in confidence about its answer, then it's more likely that it is hallucinating. Another way is just to analyze national language models behavior. So in this way we can also perform estimation on a Russian English model where we only have access to the model like Chatry Petit for example, but then we have no access. So in previous work what they do is perform sampling during recording and then they evaluate the consistency. And if there are too many divergences between the answers, then the Allen is not confident on his answer, and.

Another way is to incorporate an additional language language model. In one paper they did it by just using an external Lash language model which acts as an examiner. And then we and then the current models that we evaluated would ask us an examinee and then the examiner last language model would keep asking questions interviewing the. Last language model of interest, and then they try to see if the answer from the last language model is consistent or not. But in this way guess it would be more time consuming and also cost more in terms of computational costs.

Yes, I'm questioning, grabbing this uncertainty estimation. The topic part with you is the origin of this caring. Is that always the case like when we have like this factual hallucination when the mother thinks actually that's a fact? Think this is not always the case, it's just one way to detect hallucination because one problem with last language model for machine translation models is that they are overconfident and even though they produce wrong answers, it can still produce very. So in this way we can use this token probability orange to be. We can try to find some hallucinative problems, but we are not guaranteed to find every single hallucinative.

So for hallucination detection there is benchmarks on looking face like recently people spent a lot of time in effort to create. And then evaluate it with models so people can just evaluate on that type of benchmark. Just talk about one recent data set for hallucination detection, which is stored held. So in this dataset they call it human annoted hallucination samples, but they also improve automatically. One way of doing that is that they form the model and then they act as a hallucinator and then answer this.

Then they do manual human evaluation to evaluate the performance of and there's two ways to use this dataset that either we input the sample into some large language model and ask it whether it can recognize. Another way is that we can pair the samples in the data with human evaluation to test our own model. Will say this is not fully automated because if we want to know whether our model hallucinated. So let's talk about hallucination and mitigation. The first thing is to mitigate data-related hallucinations.

The first point is to do factuality data enhancement. And one obvious way of solving this is to do manual quality checking of the data that we're using to pre-change tomorrow. But again this is quite problematic because human evaluation. And that it would be problematic as we scale up the amount of training data. So it's not always that feasible, it could just do it manually.

The second one is to do de-biasing as mentioned before. It is quite problematic when we have multiple duplications. So instead is to duplicate the training data. This can be done in the surface level when we do string matching or we can also do it in the semantic level where we just invite the documents or the sentences. But then this is also costly, but not in terms of human effort, but more like costly in terms of computational resource.

We would also like to de-biase the societal biases. In order to do this, we should carefully. But from my point of view this would be also quite difficult because we are not aware of what. If we try to select diverse and representative training data for one type of bias, for example gender, then we can still miss on other. So it would be difficult in the sense that there can be biases that we are not aware of, the ones that we are aware of.

At the mitigation aspect is on mitigating knowledge boundary, so again knowledge hallucination issues is when the model doesn't have enough knowledge or when outdated. And one way of fixing it is to do knowledge editing. The first way to do it is to modify model parameters. They try to find the layers where that is responsible for a certain fact. And then subsequently restoring the activation. Then they see how destroying the activation.

Then they try to look at where the pack is located in the model. Then do some map which don't. In this way you would need full white lock access to the model, which is not always possible. Another thing is meta learning methods where people train an external hypernetwork to predict the weight update of the original.

This would also be useful if you have to train an external model and you have to create some reasonable training. Another way of doing this is to preserve model parameters where people just use additional model plucking. But in this way you would also need access to the White Box model in order to implement the actual blocking. Question to the wrong method: Maybe I don't know if it's understood completely, but could there not be like side effects if we just remove the layer and retrain it by anything? In fact, we just have another effect by maybe changing something else. Yeah, I think in the paper they also have a section on that, and somehow they claim that it does invert the other packs too much. But then again there are endless amounts of packs, and I think they can only check for a certain amount.

They show they indicate that it might not be an issue, but still is not definitely confirmative. And also they don't destroy or remove the layer completely, so hopefully it doesn't change too much. But then the room paper when I read it was only on changing one single act. I'm not sure about the scalability as well because if they want to change multiple packs at once then probably.

Continuing on mitigating knowledge boundary and other ways to do retrieval augmentation. The first one is retriever when. And then we have a generator, usually our LMS, that generates output conditioning on both input. So in this way we tell the model to only look like the relevant documents in order to put the answer to the question that we need instead of letting the model say whatever it wants that it is retrieved from its own internal knowledge. So in this way if you have some updated fat you can just include it in the relevant document and then the model is forced.

Another aspect of hallucination mitigation is to mitigate knowledge through failure. As mentioned before, this is the issue when the model has too long contacts. One way of solving this is to do a chain of prompting. So instead of asking the model to answer directly, you ask the model to explain the process of arriving at the output. Some research shows that by doing this, the model is more likely.

Another way of doing it is to directly supplement questions rather than information. Just show me exactly what you're. You also put in some steps by step by step. For example, when you do your examine, there's. To do the same thing for a lot of language morrow as in giving kids on what direction to think.

The next one is mitigating pre-chewing ultraviolet hallucination. So there's one practically enhanced training method where the motivation is when we change our language model. And then the model would be trained with fragmented information and incorrect entity association just because we cut off the documents. So one way of solving this is to apply the topic prefix to each sentence in fact to a document, and in this way the model can cheap each document as a stand alone fact, even though we've. And the last one is mitigating inference-related hallucination.

Doing it is to do competence decoding in which people try to incorporate a confidence bar during the decoding process. People try to make it emphasize the source more when the content is far slowed. Because we assume that when the confidence bar is low, probably the model is again focusing too locally on the token study close to it, and then we would make the model to somehow pay more attention to the inner-south. Another way is to use automatic faithfulness metrics to run candidates generated by these search. So when we do themed surgery we just multiply the probability of all tokens so far in order to rent the hypothesis and then just choose the most probable output. But here people also input faithfulness.

Guess it would come at some post that the model accuracy may reduce or the fluent sentence might be reduced. So that is all about hallucination on air lenses, any question or discussion point. If not, then we can move on to hallucination in machine translation. This section is somehow shorter because from my own view file like hallucination in machine translation.

Machine translation: The task is to translate some given sort in some language to another, so hallucination here will simply be when the translation is irrelevant. So in order to verify this we have to look at the translation and at the source sentence itself and see whether those. Whereas for hallucination in Alam we have to verify it against external source, we. And we also have to kind of exhaust this task because we cannot find all possible facts in the world. But here Guinte is somehow easier because you just have to look at the source engine.

Like coalesce, the hallucination in doesn't happen very often. Also based this part on a survey paper, the title of the paper is looking for a needle in a haystack. But then it can severely harm the user trust because this hallucination can sometimes be very fluent. Tassonomy of hallucination for empty. The first type of hallucination is absolutely hallucination.

For example, here we have the reference translation. In the case where based on the pertinent system of regulation compromise is not possible, it's referred to as: And then the hallucinated answer is a choria, which is the name of a choria, so it just gets stuck in some boating loop, and then. The second type, which in my opinion is more dangerous, is largely influenced with nation. So we have to example here where the reference is tickets for our buses and the subway is too expensive, especially in Stockholm. So is this completely fluent, and there's even some overlapping tokens to the reference, but then the content is completely different.

Another example is head up to the rooms, open up the windows and sabre the view. Breathe deeply marble and then the hallucinative answer is to stop. In this case it doesn't even happen overlapping to the source or to the reference sentence. So in this first case people would call it partially detach hallucination and in the second case they would. So in the first type of hallucination, when the model is just stuck in something over and over again, if you look at the translation, we know that something is wrong because it just.

So it's easy to detect and people would know not to believe it, but then in the second case, when the hallucinative sentence is really fluent and seems really reasonable, it would be impossible for people who doesn't speak the soft language to detect it and to understand that this is not reliable. So in my opinion this is a more dangerous way of a dangerous type of hallucination. And now on hallucination detection from machine translation. The general form would be that hallucinative translation would. So the first step on hallucination is just to build out low quality translation and to do different.